Once around, Schwashman Wackman 1.
Swashman Wacman one identified as a
comet 29P. So the 29th periodic comet
and with the names there of its
discoverers discovered on the 15th of
November 1927
by Arnold Schwashman and Arno Arthur
Wman
Hamburg Observatory on photographic
plates and at the time it was magnitude
13 so relatively bright for this sort of
method of discovery. Um, and that was
because it was actually in the middle of
having an outburst.
Pre-reovery images have been traced back
over 25 years back to 1902 when it was
again bright at 12th magnitude. But it's
not always this bright.
Its orbit, well, it's beyond Jupiter and
in a rather circular path with a very
low eccentricity
going from 5.8 8 to 6.3 astronomical
units. Jupiter's orbit is 5.2 and very
circular. You can see the path of what
I'm going to call SW1
because it's easier to pronounce going
around slightly tilted. Goes a little
bit above and below the plane of
Jupiter's orbit and takes 14.87
years to do one lap of the sun. Now,
that's strange because that's not what
you would think of as a typical comet
orbit. It's very uncomtike behavior to
be in a near circular orbit relatively
close to the ecliptic plane um and going
around just between Jupiter and Saturn
there.
So physically it's quite a large object.
38 mi 60 km in diameter. That's large
for a comet nucleus, but not the
largest. You've got a selection of them
there. So it's um smaller than Hail Bop,
which is definitely one of the largest
we've seen. There's 46 miles and then
you've got VQ94 there at 60 mi, which is
one of the record holders. So, but it's
on the large size for a comet. Many of
them there. It's only seven miles
across. So, it's considerably larger
than that.
And as I said, it was detected because
of an outburst and it has these
outbursts that brighten it by a factor
of 100. Uh so that's uh five magnitudes
and that's happens not randomly but
about every 57 days. And we think that
this is linked to its rotation period.
So spinning on its axis
maybe in 57day period
and it's some sort of cryo volcanic
activity. But this is not because it's
coming close to the sun. It's always
beyond the orbit of Jupiter. Remember so
actually this is rather peculiar
behavior for a comet. Comets do undergo
cryovanic outbursts, but normally only
when they enter the inner solar system
round about the orbit of Earth or closer
do they start to out gas. So this is
active and out in the freeze beyond
Jupiter.
And really it's now clear that this is
not a comet. This is a centaur. So SW1,
a member of a class of objects first
identified by Charles Cowell in uh the
1970s.
We found objects orbiting on what you
might call temporary orbits out amongst
the giant planets between Jupiter and
Neptune.
small icy bodies going around the sun in
orbits that are eventually going to get
perturbed by interactions with the giant
planets. Um so they've probably had such
interactions in the past out in the
Kiper belt and then found themselves
moving into the inner solar system and
give getting another gravitational
slingshot from a one of the giant
planets and into these temporary orbital
positions.
We found about 500 since object cowl
Chiron the first of the centaurs was
found. Um but that was 50 years after
SW1 was located and we didn't know
anything about such things at the time.
So hence it was classified as a comet
because these small icy bodies that seem
to undergo outbursts were all comets.
Right? But now we know better and this
is actually a centaur that is undergoing
these outbursts. It will get perturbed
again by Jupiter sometime between now
and the year 4000. So, sometime over the
next 2,000 years, there's going to be an
encounter that's going to cause its
orbit to change again. Jupiter will give
it a bit of a shove or a a pull
gravitationally, and that will change
the orbit either inwards or outwards,
and we don't really know. It's just so
chaotic that it's difficult to predict
exactly what that encounter will look
like.
But interestingly, it doesn't seem to be
on its own. It seems that there are
several other objects related to SW1.
There's 2020 MK4 in a similarish orbit,
just slightly longer, 15.23 years
instead of 14.87
with an orbit at around about 6.1
astronomical units.
There's P2020, sorry, P2010,
T020 linear grower, which linear grower
suggests a comet. P suggests a comet,
but again, this is in an orbit going
around the sun that's fairly circular
and just outside the orbit of uh
Jupiter. Again, P208 CL94 Lemon. again a
comet with the P slash uh designation
and then 2016 LN8 which is a uh minor
planet uh designation.
All four of those share similar orbital
paths to S SW1
and MK4 has a very close approach to it.
They all exhibit cometlike activities.
showing slight tails. And the picture at
the top there, that's linear grower
whose orbit is shown in the little
diagram. And these are all perhaps
fragments of the breakup of a larger
body and that SW1 is perhaps the largest
fragment of that. And the impact that
broke these other fragments off and sent
them off in slightly different orbits
around just beyond Jupiter is probably
the reason why we're seeing those
periodic outbursts. So it was probably
not that long ago in the history of the
solar system. So, comet Swashman,
Wackman 1, SW1, a very interesting
member of the minor components of the
solar system, one that's been known for
nearly a hundred years, but only really
beginning to be understood now. And so,
I'll leave you with that. Thank you very
much for listening.